Excerpt from The philosophical works of Leibnitz : comprising the Monadology, New system of nature, Principles of nature and of grace, Letters to Clarke, Refutation of Spinoza, and his other important philosophical opuscules, together with the Abridgment of the Theodicy and extracts from the New essays on human understanding : translated from the original Latin and French by Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, Freiherr von, 1646-1716; Duncan, George Martin, 1857-1928; Easley, Ralph M. (Ralph Montgomery), b. 1858 (bookplate)

(https://archive.org/details/philosophicalwor00leibuoft/page/n11/mode/2up)

sun{XXXIII_THE_MONADOLOGY_is_a_nice_extra_read_no_flags_though}

BOOK IV. OF KNOWLEDGE.

CHAPTER I.

Of knowledge in general.

1 and 2. [1. Our knowledge conversant about our ideas. 2.
Knowledge is the perception of the agreement or disagreement of
two ideas. } Knowledge is employed still more generally, in such a
way that it is found also in ideas or terms, before we come to prop
ositions or truths. And it may be said that he who shall have seen
attentively more pictures of plants and of animals, more figures of
machines, more descriptions or representations of houses or of fort
resses, who shall have read more ingenious romances, heard more
curious narratives, he, I say, will have more knowledge than an 
other, even if there should not be a word of truth in all which has 
been portrayed or related to him ; for the practice which he has in 
representing to himself mentally many express and actual concep 
tions or ideas, renders him more fit to conceive what is proposed to 
him ; and it is certain that he will be better instructed and more 
capable than another, who has neither seen nor read nor heard any 
thing, provided that in these stories and representations he does not 
take for true that which is not true, and that these impressions do not 
hinder him otherwise from distinguishing the real from the imagni- 
ary, or the existing from the possible .... But taking knowledge 
in a narrower meaning, that is, for knowledge of truth, as you do 
here, sir, I say that it is very true that truth is always founded in 
the agreement or disagreement of ideas, but it is not true generally 
that our knowledge of truth is a perception of this agreement or 
disagreement. For when we know truth only empirically, from 
having experienced it, without knowing the connection of things 
and the reason which there is in what we have experienced, we 
have no perception of this agreement or disagreement, unless it be 
meant that we feel it confusedly without being conscious of it. 
But your examples, it seems, show that you always require a knowl 
edge in which one is conscious of connection or of opposition, and 
this is what cannot be conceded to you. 7. Fourthly, Of real existence^}
I believe that it may be said that
connection is nothing else than accordance or relation, taken
generally. And I have remarked on this point that every relation
 is either of comparison or of concurrence. That of comparison
 gives diversity and identity, either in all or in something ;
that which makes the same or the diverse, the like or unlike.
Concurrence contains what you call co-existence, that is, connection of
existence. But when it is said that a thing exists or that it has real
existence, this existence itself is the predicate ; that is, it has an
idea joined with the idea in question, and there is connection be
tween these two notions. One may conceive also the existence of
the object of an idea, as the concurrence of this object with me. So
I believe that it may be said that there is only comparison or concurrence 
; but that comparison, which marks identity or diversity,
and the concurrence of the thing with me, are relations which deserve
to be distinguished among others. More exact and more profound
researches might perhaps be made ; but I content myself 
here with making remarks. 